Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev is a realized master Mystic and Yogi.
He has shown the way for people to attain to their natural joy
and to live life with experience from one's own inner nature.
His presence is filled with grace and compassion.
Sod Guru's scientific approach towards spirituality and work
towards the upliftment of humanity have received accolades
worldwide.
The words that come from him in intensity and utmost clarity,
from his deep understanding and wisdom, can change the very core
of the Being.
Belonging to no particular tradition, Sadhguru incorporates
what is most valid for the modern person from the spiritual sciences.
His work, An outpouring of his blissfulness, finds expression
in the form of a ceaseless offering to help all beings
available to all who are willing.
Sadhguru's life is an invitation to the divine through individual transformation.
Welcome to the silent revolution of self realization.
Always a manifold way in which people make use of the spiritual
processes for some people in many places.
Spirituality and all this spiritual what?
What do you call them?
What are those talks called in Hindi?
Pravachans, all that pravachan, everything is just the escape from the mother-in-law or cooking.
For some, it's an intellectual entertainment.
For some, they are seeking to learn something.
They want to know something new.
A few people are wanting to, you know, bring about some changes in their life.
They want to become little more peaceful, little more loving,
little more something else.
Some change they want in their life.
Some people are looking for transformation.
You know the difference between change and transformation?
Hmm.
Transformation means nothing of the old should remain.
Change means improvement, self improvement or transformation.
Or some people just try really wanting to get lost into it,
dissolve into it.
So many ways when people are approaching the same thing, it's
a which is the best way.
I wouldn't say which is the best way because according to each
person's needs, that's how they seek.
You can't prescribe the best way to anybody right now.
Generally, the human nature is such that whatever they don't
have, that's what they will seek.
They don't have health.
They're seeking health as if it's the ultimate thing.
If they don't have money, they're seeking money as if it's
the ultimate thing.
If they don't have love, they're seeking love as if it's the
ultimate thing.
Whatever they don't have, that's what they're seeking.
That reminds me, this happened when we were in Trichy.
You know Trichy Sadhguru.
Channapally, it's a medium sized town in Tamil Nadu in a high
school.
The teacher came and asked the students 8th or 9th, 7th
children, if God appears in front of you and gives you a
boon, what will you ask?
One boy said.
Those days you know Maruti car.
I want a Maruti car.
Somebody said I want a bicycle.
Somebody said I want, you know,
₹10,00,000 like this, they went
on.
Then the teacher said, You idiots, what will you do with
all these things?
Ask for intelligence.
Ask for knowledge, Ask for intelligence.
Why are you asking for all these things?
So one boy stood up and said everybody asks for what they
don't have.
So everybody is seeking what they don't have, isn't it,
sadhguru?
Now if you go by this, when a human being goes by this process
of asking for what he doesn't have, then it's an endless
process.
Because what is it that you have?
What you have is so little.
If you go on asking for what you don't have, you need 1000 years
and still you will be nowhere If you start seeking the next thing
that you don't have.
It's an endless process, self defeating process isn't it?
It seems to be taking you somewhere, but it doesn't take
you anywhere.
So what is this about?
If you don't seek, if there is no seeking, you don't go
anywhere you know.
Why would you go to any place if there's nothing to seek?
Because that's a very basis of your activity.
Desiring and going after it, isn't it?
The objects of desire may change, and people may think one
object is better than the other, but it's not.
So whether you're seeking money or home, Oregon intelligence or
knowledge or God or this or that, desire is a desire I know.
The object of desire just changes the directions of your
destination, but doesn't change the process of life as such.
And the essence of life is in its process, isn't it?
Where you got in the end is not the point really.
In many ways right now, the essence of life is how you're
experiencing it right now.
So one's quality of life, if you are changing or if you're
wanting to experience life in a little better way or in a much
better way, whatever, Changing the objects of desire is not
going to make so much of a difference.
It's the way we handle the process which is going to make
the difference.
But even if life becomes very pleasant and beautiful
experience, it has to happen every human being.
But even if it happens, still you will see there is something
within you which doesn't want to settle for justice, joyful life
either.
You're very happy and after some time even that doesn't seem to
be enough because happiness is missing right now.
The whole life seems to be pursuit of happiness.
If you're joyful then you will see it's not enough.
In fact, if you're very happy, you will do many more things
than when you're unhappy.
Isn't it so?
Because now you're charged and now there's nothing pulling you
back.
You have all the enthusiasm to go about and do lots of things.
So there is something that this life is longing for.
It's not a desire, it's its destination.
It is not something, a desire that you created or I created.
It is just longing to go towards a certain destination.
The only choice that we have is either to move towards this
destination consciously or unconsciously.
Any way we are moving, whether to go towards it consciously or
unconsciously.
If we are dragged towards something unconsciously, even if
we are dragged towards heaven, we will suffer the dragging,
isn't it?
Yes.
Now we grab you and we'll drag you out.
You don't know where you're being dragged.
You will suffer this.
We will take you and put you on a beautiful beach, sadhguru.
That's later.
But right now, all along from here to there, you are going to
suffer it terribly, isn't it?
So if you walk towards anything, or if life drags you towards a
certain direction and you are unconscious about it, you will
suffer the process immensely.
So if you look at it consciously, if you go towards
it consciously, then the process becomes beautiful.
That's all the choice we have, really.
We once we are conscious, we naturally haste in the process.
Whatever we are unconscious of and that level we suffer.
You must understand this.
See, right now you're driving on the street.
You are completely unconscious of who is coming behind you, who
is coming in front of you.
Now you are going to get into one kind of physical suffering
because you are unaware of the physical reality.
Physical suffering will come.
Something is going to break, isn't it?
Now you're unaware of what is happening in your body.
Another kind of suffering will come.
You're unaware of what's happening in your mind.
Another kind of suffering will come.
You're unaware of what's happening in your family.
Another kind of suffering will come.
Similarly, wherever you're unaware, that level of suffering
will come to you.
Is that so?
You're getting this is holiday, you're getting dead serious.
Once a pirate.
No pirate.
A pirate walked into the bar.
The bartender knew him from long ago, He's seen him just the
previous year, and now he's come back after his expeditions.
He looked at him and said, Hey, what happened to you?
You look terrible, the poet said.
No, I'm just feeling just about fine.
Then, the bartender said.
But what happened to your leg?
Why the wooden leg?
Oh that?
We were just having a battle with another rival group.
I saw a cannonball coming straight at me before I could
move.
It hit my right leg and I'm doing quite fine with the wooden
leg, I'm pretty good.
And the bartender said, what about the hook?
He said, left hand, you have a hook.
What happened to that?
Oh, we were just having a sword fight for fun and my left hand
got chopped off.
But I'm doing quite fine with this hook.
In fact, it's more useful than the hand.
Then he asked, what about the eye patch?
You lost one eye.
What happened?
Oh, that?
I was just looking up at the sky, and a bird poop fell into
my eyes.
Oh, come on.
Whoever heard of anybody losing their eyes for bird poop?
How would you lose your eyes for bird poop?
No, that was the first day I had my hook on.
Whatever you are not aware of there, you suffer.
Isn't this there that brings suffering to you?
So we're talking about awareness, Awareness.
Awareness.
Awareness is not something that you do, actually.
In fact, the less you do, the more aware you become within
yourself, the less your activity becomes inside what you call as
me.
The less that becomes, the more your awareness becomes, The less
your personality becomes, the more your presence becomes.
Always.
Personality means you have to do a lot to keep it up, isn't it?
Yes, most of the activity that you're doing to keep up your
person is unconscious, but you're doing enormous activity
to maintain a certain personality, isn't it?
If that activity gets lowered, suddenly awareness gets
heightened.
Because awareness is not something that you do.
The very life is awareness, isn't it?
The very basis of life is awareness.
You know that you're alive only because you're aware, isn't it?
If all awareness disappears, at least on this level, we can call
it death.
So spirituality is not something that you do.
If you stop doing all your nonsense, you're spiritual, you
know.
Unnecessary nonsense.
If you stop spirituality is, you know, not something that you
have to do and make it happen or create it.
It's not so.
But still.
Why?
If that is so, why am I doing my pranayam in the morning?
Oh, even in a resort.
They made us do it.
I'm sorry, the resort.
That's because there is no brakes on your activity.
What you do within yourself, you have no brakes on it.
So we are creating a certain physical, mental and energy
situation where everything gets diverted from your activity.
Slowly practice establishes a situation where the life
energies raised to a certain pitch and intensity that slowly
the activity becomes insignificant.
It's still there, it's still happening.
You've seen this in Shonya meditation.
You've just said activity is still happening, but it's
insignificant.
The same activity which was so significant has become
insignificant.
We have not stopped it.
We have not done anything to, but somehow it has become not so
important.
You see this happening when you just sit and meditate and show
me everything is happening.
But it's no more important.
It's lost its significance, it's lost its impact upon you.
It's lost its influence upon you.
It doesn't mould you anymore.
All the activity of the mind stops moulding you.
You're no more being moulded by that activity, this, this whole
distortion that we have done to life in the form of creating our
person.
See, when you create your personality, because it's
created mostly unconsciously, just a small part of it may be
conscious.
Rest of it is all unconscious, isn't it Sadhguru?
When you create your own your personality somewhere in one
way, it means somewhere you thought creator has not done a
good enough job on you, isn't it?
If it needs improvement, definitely he did not do a good
enough job on you, isn't it so?
So why would you feel that such a grand creation is not good
enough?
Something that's so enormous and fantastic is not good enough.
Why?
Because in this simple process of self preservation, you know,
there is a simple basic process which is built into every cell
in our body.
Every worm, insect, animal has this.
We also have it, Sadhguru.
Simple process of self preservation.
We don't know where to contain it.
It has just spread itself into everything.
Because it's spread itself into everything.
You have to create a small person of yourself who will
defend himself all the time.
As we've been looking at in the programs, the only thing that
needs preservation is your physical body, your personality.
We must maul it every day.
It should be OK, isn't it?
Every day?
If we can make mincemeat out of your personality, you could
create another one tomorrow morning.
Isn't it?
So we've been trying to do that gently, because if I go very
hard at it, you'll run away gently, step by step.
We're trying to make mincemeat out of your personality so that
it becomes a flexible aspect.
You cannot live without a personality.
You need one to exist here to.
Go about in the world, do all your work, manage things.
But if it's a flexible thing that in different places, as it
is necessary for the situation you can put on the right kind of
personality, then it would be fine.
But right now it is like a rock.
It sits on you all the time.
Anything that doesn't fit into its ambit.
It makes you suffer, isn't it?
Who drew this caricature that you call as myself?
Definitely yourself, but influenced by so many people
around you?
You know you're 1516.
You go and watch a Amitabh
Bachchan movie.
You come home and try to walk like him.
Unconsciously, yes, isn't it?
Sometimes.
Maybe consciously, but most of the time unconsciously, isn't
it?
So this caricature came into existence because of all kinds
of bits and pieces that are gathered.
It happened when we were in school.
There was a boy who was studying with me, who had a excellent
hand.
You know, he could just sketch anybody with whatever kind of
distortion he wanted.
So there was one very hated geography teacher, and when he
entered the class, this boy had a horrible caricature of him
ready on the blackboard, badly distorted, but everybody can
clearly recognize who it is with all kinds of very bad
distortions on him.
Then he walked in and as usual, he walks into the class always
with a temper.
Whether he's talking about the grasslands in America or he
talks about the deserts in
Africa, he's always in bad
temper.
He the moment he saw he just one thing he was angry.
Another thing, he was somehow hit by the whole thing, the
distortions.
Then he asked who is responsible for this terrible atrocity?
As usual, you know, everybody suddenly interested in
geography.
Very studious.
And then he repeated the game.
Who is responsible for this atrocity?
He thinks it's an atrocity.
We thought it was appropriate.
Then somebody made-up their mind and stood up and said we really
don't know, but it should be his parents.
So for this atrocity that you call as myself, it's not your
parents, this is you.
Only you can commit this atrocity of distorting yourself
into such a tiny possibility.
When an unbounded possibility was what you were offered with
life, you were offered an unbounded possibility.
You made a such a bad distortion and made yourself into such a
tiny possibility if you stop creating this caricature,
because this caricature cannot exist one day without your
support.
You need to support it all the time, Sadhguru.
What meditation means, means in one way you're just withdrawing
the support for your personality.
That's how suddenly it collapses.
Only the presence is there, the person is no more there.
If you could walk on the street like this, if you could operate
with people like this all the time, that you have no
personality but looking at this person at this moment, how she
is, accordingly you put up a personality as it is necessary
for this person.
Now you go to that person, you put up a personality that is
necessary for that person.
Then it would be so much fun drawing new new caricatures
every day.
But once you get stuck to a particular distortion, that
becomes a problem every day.
If you have a new distortion, it's called art, isn't it?
If you're stuck with one distortion, then it's called
You're called a freak, isn't it?
Isn't it?
So every day, if you're able to create a new distortion, that is
artwork, isn't it?
If you're stuck with one distortion, you're a cripple.
So that's the big difference
Sadhguru, when you're talking
about personality, Sadhguru, we have to have different
personalities as a parent, as a husband and at work.
In normal living.
It becomes very difficult to change the personality.
Sadhguru, you mean to say people around you won't let you change
it?
Not true.
See, right now let's say you are going to work in us.
We'll take the work situation because it's less personal for
you.
You are going to work with a certain attitude, and a certain
certain person is going to work, which is you right?
Now, let's say he goes briskly like this every day.
Hmm.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Don't mean a good morning to anybody.
The way people say good morning, it's very clear they intend to
give you a bad morning.
So suppose you are going like this tomorrow morning.
If you go really say good morning to people and smile at
them and maybe hold their hand and ask some personal question,
talk to them and go in, maybe you'll waste 5-10 minutes going
into your office.
But if people around you are happy, you'll have lot of extra
time on your hands because they'll run around and do things
better.
Isn't it?
If you have people who are sitting there with the grouse,
then you know they will make your life miserable in so many
ways.
Not one way you have to live with them, but these people have
the grouse against you.
They are going to make your life so bad.
Isn't it?
Now can I change my personality every day?
Won't it confuse people?
Not at all.
They would enjoy you most.
Isn't it so?
And will it bring down your efficiency of work?
Definitely not.
It is not because of the compulsion of the situation.
You've gotten stuck with one personality.
It is just that the whole construction of the personality
has happened in unawareness.
That's why you're stuck with one personality now.
You said we have one kind of personality at home, another
with children, another with, you know, work, and outside.
If you look at it, it may not be true.
You may be functioning in different capacities.
The requirement of how you function may be different, but
still the basic personality may be same everywhere.
The underlying personality is still the same.
You can change that also, and it'll be so much fun for you to
change that.
It'll be absolute fun for you to change that because you can
experience a whole new person all the time.
After all, it's your creation.
Why should it be limited to just one way?
If God had fixed a personality for you, that's all there is.
But when you have built it like you change your clothes every
day in different ways, isn't it?
But most people cannot even change that, isn't it?
They've gotten used to certain thing and that's all it is,
isn't it?
So I think we should have done something today.
Everybody should dress in a completely different way and
come not your usual kind of clothes.
You're wearing pants all the time today.
You wear a saree and ***.
Just loosen yourself up a little bit, you know?
It's important.
The reason why what is the very essence of life is missing in
people's life is because they become stiff and spiritual
people are stiffer than anybody else.
Isn't it so stiff?
It still doesn't answer your question.
Hmm.
There can be changes in the behavior but your personality
remains the same.
It remains the same.
That's what I'm saying.
You are stuck to one personality.
It's just the actions are different because the situations
are different.
But the person is same, isn't it?
So the person is same because what your personality is has
become you.
You are completely identified with it.
TCH.
There is no distinction between you and your personality, isn't
it?
You have become that the mask has gotten stuck to your face.
Now you can't take away the mask if this mask has to come off.
We need something to loosen the glue which has gotten stuck to
this.
It is identity.
So now we are creating various situations where your identity
dissolves in a certain way.
Meditation or any kind of yoga practice, whatever, is just to
loosen the identities so that there's a little more
flexibility about it.
Maybe the whole of it has not come off, but at least you can
adjust it a little bit.
There's a mask.
Being totally stuck, at least little, you are able to take a
breather, that much break it is giving you.
But if you work a little more with this, you can take it and
keep it off.
Now people, when they come to advanced programs, three days or
seven days they're in Samyama or
Bavaspandana.
The person that you are, you'll just simply forget who you are.
You don't know who you are.
It'll become like that because the situation created is so
intense and so different.
Everything that you know as normal is broken after some
time.
You don't know who is here.
After the program is over and you come back, you just wonder,
is it me who went through all that?
Most people can't believe that they actually went through
Samyama and came simply because it's created like that.
The whole situation, not only the meditation process, the
situation also is created in such a way that it doesn't
assist your personality in any way.
The whole thing is to take off all the supports because your
personality cannot exist for a moment without your support.
If you involve yourself in any intense activity, it could
loosen up a little bit, but that is haphazard.
For example, let's say you go and play a game, those moments
of total involvement.
You may lose your personality, but that is a haphazard way of
attempting it.
Now we are looking at how to approach it scientifically, how
to dismantle the all the scaffolding that is holding it
up.
If you have noticed this people who are very, very committed and
enjoying the process of working sadhguru, they always have more
flexible personalities than people who are working towards a
goal.
Is it?
So have you noticed this?
Hmm because just the involvement with the work, total
involvement, those moments the personality becomes little
loose.
But people who are working towards a goal that they want
this to happen, those people have strong personalities.
Always the fundamental basis for your personality, the building
blocks for your personality, is likes and dislikes.
I like this.
I don't like this.
A complex system of likes and dislikes is what your
personality is, isn't it?
See what's the difference between you and the next person?
Your likes and dislikes are different, isn't it?
Now the basis of yoga is just this help you beyond dislikes
and dislikes.
Whether we are talking responsibility or inevitability
or whatever else we are talking.
Fundamentally it is to destroy the process of like and dislike.
See, existing in the world with likes and dislikes is a very
foolish way to exist.
But unfortunately the logical mind thinks I'll do what I like.
This is my freedom.
Very basis of your ******* is in your likes and dislikes, but
your mind makes you believe doing what you like is your
freedom.
Isn't it all the time?
Everywhere in the world people believe doing what I like is
freedom.
Please look at it carefully.
The very fundamental basis of your ******* is in like and
dislike.
To operate sensibly here, even in the physical realm.
I'm saying even to operate with your work, Oregon family,
whatever likes and dislikes make you do stupid things.
I like this person.
I don't like this person now.
I cannot function from what is needed in this moment, isn't it?
Isn't it?
So now I don't like this person.
Even if this person is doing something wonderful, I cannot
see it anymore.
Do you see this happening to yourself?
I like this person, even if they're doing terrible things.
I cannot see it anymore.
Isn't it so?
Because the moment you get trapped in this like and
dislike, you have no discretion.
You lost your discretion.
Your intelligence is forsaken.
Your awareness is simply impossible once you get trapped
in likes and dislikes.
The moment you say I like this, getting identified with it is
very normal.
It's a natural process.
You don't have to say I'm going to identify with this light
bulb.
If you just say I like this light bulb, you get identified
with it.
The process will just happen.
See, life is set up in such a way for you so that life happens
automatically.
You just have to sit here and enjoy the bounty of life.
Now the problem is we are setting this forth in a wrong
direction, so it is creating suffering.
Suppose if it was all in your hands.
You have to like it.
You have to get involved with it.
It's everything is yours.
It would be a terrible effort to live, isn't it?
Now it's all set up.
Well, you know, the whole software is so well set up.
If you just say I like this, getting involved in it, get
dreaming about it, this, that that everything just happens by
itself, isn't it?
Everything that is necessary to take you in that direction just
happens, isn't it?
So.
So this is just life assisting you, but it has no discretion.
If you like hell, it'll take you to hell.
It happened once, Sadhguru, you call a person who hires people
in a corporation or whatever,
HR, HR, OK, the HR director in a
corporation died and went to heaven there.
Saint Peter said.
See, because you're the first HR
person to come to heaven, we
will give you a choice.
If you want, you can stay in heaven because you got the
passport.
But before you go to heaven, if you want, you can have a view of
hell.
If you wish to stay there, you can also stay there.
This is a lady HR person.
She said no.
Why would I want to go to hell?
I want to go to heaven, he said.
Why wouldn't you want to have a look at it?
He said OK, She got in the elevator, went dreaming down.
Then the elevator doors opened and it opened into a beautiful
garden on the poolside.
Very beautiful.
People are swimming, like, you know, sunbathing.
And there's a wonderful golf course and then a nice
clubhouse, the works.
See now, this is great hell.
She had a view of that.
And then Saint Peter said, OK, you have a view of heaven, then
you choose.
Then she got in the elevator, It went up.
Supposed to be down and up.
OK, that's a direction.
At least you better know now we're down South there.
They opened the doors and then she saw lots of clouds, people
just floating in the clouds playing harp.
And you know, she said, OK, this is also fine, but I think I'll
go to hell.
All my friends are there, this golf.
I'll go.
So they put her in the elevator.
She just went down and again the doors open.
It was a harsh desert.
Everybody all dried up without food, in terrible condition.
Everything, she said.
What is this?
Last time when I came, there was a garden, there was a pool,
there was a golf course.
What happened?
So they said that was just the first day, you know, now your
staff, that was the interview.
Now your staff, all your life, you did this to people.
So this is your choice, your personality.
I don't know if you're working in places, at least if you're
HR.
Is there anybody HR?
Oh, especially if you're HR, maybe you.
Also, you're supposed to size up a person, you know, somebody new
walks into your office.
You're supposed to size them up where they will fit into this
whole machine of an organization.
So if you're willing to look, people's personalities are
always hanging out.
You know they need not say anything.
They need not do anything if you just look at them properly.
The very way they stand, sit.
You don't need any great yogic intuition.
Simply a simple observation of a person.
The very way they stand, the way they hold their hands, the way
they smile, the way they do things, their personality is
just hanging out of them.
So it's so obvious to everybody except yourself, you know,
That's the whole thing.
Sadhguru, you are my perfect mirror.
You show me what I'm not in.
The endless bit of what wants was made.
Layer and layer.
You peel off me the pain it is but the joy it brings.
So thank you for showing me what
I'm not for showing me what I
could be.
Thank you endlessly, but if I
could only just be you could
show me all the things I would be willing enough to see the.